README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">
  <br>
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leocavalcante/vhp/main/docs/assets/logo.png" alt="VHP Logo" width="200">
  <br>
  VHP
  <br>
</h1>

<h4 align="center">Vibe-coded Hypertext Preprocessor</h4>

<p align="center">
  <em>What if you could build an entire programming language... just by asking?</em>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp/actions/workflows/ci.yml"><img src="https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg" alt="CI"></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp/blob/main/LICENSE"><img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/leocavalcante/vhp" alt="License"></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp"><img src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/leocavalcante/vhp" alt="Stars"></a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/features">Features</a> •
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/installation">Installation</a> •
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/usage">Usage</a> •
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/examples">Examples</a> •
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/roadmap">Roadmap</a>
</p>

---

## 🚀 The Audacious Experiment

**VHP** isn't just another PHP implementation. It's a **groundbreaking experiment** in AI-assisted development: **Can an entire production-grade language runtime be built purely through conversation with AI?**

Every. Single. Line. Written through prompts to AI agents. Zero manual coding.

**The result?** A blazingly fast, memory-safe PHP 8.x interpreter written in pure Rust with **zero dependencies** — and it actually works.

### 💎 Why This Changes Everything

- **🔥 Blazingly Fast** — Native Rust performance with zero-cost abstractions
- **🛡️ Rock-Solid Security** — Memory safety guaranteed by Rust's ownership model
- **🎯 Zero Dependencies** — Pure standard library, no external crates, no bloat
- **✨ PHP 8.x Compatible** — Run your WordPress, Laravel, Drupal — *unchanged*
- **🔮 Modern Features** — Arrow functions, match expressions, fibers, attributes, pipe operator
- **📈 Battle-Tested** — 200+ comprehensive tests and counting

## ⚡ Get Started in 60 Seconds

```bash
# Clone and build
git clone https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp.git
cd vhp
cargo build --release

# Your first VHP program
./target/release/vhp -r 'echo "Hello from the future!";'

# Run any PHP file
./target/release/vhp script.php
```

**That's it.** You're now running PHP with Rust-level performance.

## 🎨 The Power of Modern PHP + Rust Performance

VHP brings the **cutting-edge features** of PHP 8.x with the **raw speed** of Rust. Here's what you get:

### Functional Programming That Actually Feels Good

```php
<?php
// Arrow functions with automatic capture (PHP 7.4)
$numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
$doubled = array_map(fn($x) => $x * 2, $numbers);

// First-class callables (PHP 8.1) - elegant function references
$formatter = strtoupper(...);
echo $formatter("hello"); // HELLO

// Pipe operator (PHP 8.5) - chain operations beautifully
$result = "hello world"
    |> strtoupper(...)
    |> str_replace("WORLD", "VHP", ...)
    |> strlen(...);
```

### Modern Language Features

```php
<?php
// Match expressions (PHP 8.0) - pattern matching done right
$status = match($code) {
    200 => "Success",
    404 => "Not Found",
    500, 503 => "Server Error",
    default => "Unknown"
};

// Enums (PHP 8.1) - type-safe choices
enum Status: string {
    case Active = "active";
    case Pending = "pending";
    case Closed = "closed";
}

// Named arguments (PHP 8.0) - crystal clear function calls
createUser(
    name: "Alice",
    email: "alice@example.com",
    verified: true
);
```

### Enterprise-Ready Concurrency

```php
<?php
// Fibers (PHP 8.1) - lightweight cooperative multitasking
$fiber = new Fiber(function(): void {
    echo "Fiber started\n";
    Fiber::suspend();
    echo "Fiber resumed\n";
});

$fiber->start();
$fiber->resume(); // Non-blocking concurrent execution
```

### Full OOP Suite

- ✨ **Anonymous Classes** — Create objects on-the-fly without declaring classes
- 🏗️ **Constructor Property Promotion** — Less boilerplate, more productivity (PHP 8.0)
- 🔒 **Readonly Properties & Classes** — Immutability for safer code (PHP 8.1/8.2)
- 🎭 **Interfaces & Traits** — Flexible, composable design patterns
- 🛡️ **Attributes** — Metadata that doesn't suck (PHP 8.0)
- 🚫 **Exception Handling** — try/catch/finally with throw expressions

## 🔥 What Makes VHP Special

### 73+ Built-in Functions and Growing

From string manipulation to array operations, math to type checking — we've got the essentials:

- **String Functions:** strlen, substr, trim, explode, implode, str_replace, strtoupper, strtolower
- **Array Functions:** count, array_push, array_pop, array_shift, array_keys, array_values, in_array, array_merge
- **Math Functions:** abs, ceil, floor, round, max, min, sqrt, pow
- **Type Functions:** intval, floatval, strval, is_string, is_int, is_array, gettype
- **Output Functions:** echo, print, var_dump
- **Reflection API:** Get attributes, analyze classes, introspect your code

### Run Real Codebases, Today

This isn't a toy. VHP targets **PHP 8.x compatibility**, which means:

- 🔷 Run **WordPress** plugins and themes
- 🔷 Execute **Laravel** applications  
- 🔷 Deploy **Drupal** sites
- 🔷 Port **existing PHP codebases** with zero changes

All with the speed and safety of Rust.

## 🤖 The "Vibe Coding" Revolution

Here's where it gets wild: **VHP is proof that AI can build production-grade systems.**

Every function, every test, every feature — built through **natural language conversations** with AI agents. No manual code writing. Just prompts, iteration, and AI doing the heavy lifting.

**This is the experiment:** Can you "vibe code" an entire programming language runtime into existence?

**The answer:** You're looking at it.

### Why Not Just Vibe Code Your Own Rust App?

Fair question. Here's the thing: **existing codebases**.

There are **millions** of PHP applications in production right now. WordPress powers 43% of the web. Laravel runs countless startups. Drupal backs major enterprises. Custom PHP systems everywhere.

**VHP gets you a new runtime for *all* of them** — without rewriting a single line of their code.

Vibe coding Rust gets you *one* new app. VHP gets you a platform for *all* PHP apps.

That's the difference between a tool and an ecosystem.

## 📊 Full Feature Checklist

**Core Language:**
- ✅ PHP tags (`<?php`, `?>`, `<?=`) with mixed HTML/PHP
- ✅ Variables, operators, and expressions
- ✅ Control flow (if/else, while, for, foreach, switch)
- ✅ Arrays (indexed, associative, nested, with trailing commas)
- ✅ User-defined and recursive functions
- ✅ Variadic functions and argument unpacking

**Modern PHP Features:**
- ✅ Arrow functions with automatic capture (PHP 7.4)
- ✅ First-class callables (PHP 8.1)
- ✅ Match expressions (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Named arguments (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Attributes with reflection (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Enums - pure and backed (PHP 8.1)
- ✅ Pipe operator (PHP 8.5)
- ✅ Fibers for concurrency (PHP 8.1)

**Object-Oriented Programming:**
- ✅ Classes & Objects (properties, methods, constructors, $this)
- ✅ Static properties and methods
- ✅ Inheritance
- ✅ Anonymous classes (PHP 7.0)
- ✅ Interfaces and Traits
- ✅ Abstract classes and methods
- ✅ Final classes and methods
- ✅ Constructor Property Promotion (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Readonly properties (PHP 8.1)
- ✅ Readonly classes (PHP 8.2)
- ✅ Object cloning with `clone` and `clone with`

**Error Handling:**
- ✅ Exception handling (try/catch/finally)
- ✅ Throw expressions (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Multi-catch blocks

**Built-in Functions (73+):**
- ✅ String functions
- ✅ Math functions
- ✅ Array functions
- ✅ Type functions
- ✅ Output functions
- ✅ Reflection API

**[→ See complete feature documentation](https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/features)**

## 🎯 What's Next

We're just getting started. Check out the [roadmap](https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/roadmap) to see what's coming:

- More built-in functions (file I/O, JSON, date/time)
- Advanced OOP features (magic methods, late static binding)
- Namespace support
- Composer compatibility
- Performance optimizations
- And much more...

## 🤝 Join the Revolution

**Want to be part of this experiment?**

- 🐛 **Found a bug?** Open an issue
- 💡 **Have an idea?** Submit a feature request
- 📝 **Improve docs?** PRs welcome
- ✅ **Add tests?** We love comprehensive coverage
- ⭐ **Show support?** Star the repo

Every contribution helps prove that AI-assisted development can build real, production-grade software.

**[→ Contributing Guidelines](https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/contributing)**

## 📜 License

BSD 3-Clause License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

<p align="center">
  <strong>Built with Rust 🦀 and AI 🤖</strong>
  <br><br>
  <em>An experiment in what's possible when humans and AI collaborate</em>
  <br><br>
  <strong>Don't just read about it. <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/installation">Try it now</a>.</strong>
</p>

Commit message:

docs: update documentation for type declarations feature
- Update AGENTS.md: Add Type Declarations section with examples, mark feature complete in roadmap
- Update README.md: Add Type Declarations to OOP features list
- Update docs/roadmap.md: Mark Type System (parsing) as complete in Phase 7
- Update docs/features.md: Add comprehensive Type Declarations section with examples
- Update test count to 373 tests in AGENTS.md
- Document current parsing-only status and planned runtime validation

Type declarations are now fully documented across all user-facing and developer documentation.

Signed-off-by: leocavalcante <leonardo.cavalcante@picpay.com>

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">
  <br>
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/leocavalcante/vhp/main/docs/assets/logo.png" alt="VHP Logo" width="200">
  <br>
  VHP
  <br>
</h1>

<h4 align="center">Vibe-coded Hypertext Preprocessor</h4>

<p align="center">
  <em>What if you could build an entire programming language... just by asking?</em>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp/actions/workflows/ci.yml"><img src="https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg" alt="CI"></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp/blob/main/LICENSE"><img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/leocavalcante/vhp" alt="License"></a>
  <a href="https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp"><img src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/leocavalcante/vhp" alt="Stars"></a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/features">Features</a> •
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/installation">Installation</a> •
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/usage">Usage</a> •
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/examples">Examples</a> •
  <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/roadmap">Roadmap</a>
</p>

---

## 🚀 The Audacious Experiment

**VHP** isn't just another PHP implementation. It's a **groundbreaking experiment** in AI-assisted development: **Can an entire production-grade language runtime be built purely through conversation with AI?**

Every. Single. Line. Written through prompts to AI agents. Zero manual coding.

**The result?** A blazingly fast, memory-safe PHP 8.x interpreter written in pure Rust with **zero dependencies** — and it actually works.

### 💎 Why This Changes Everything

- **🔥 Blazingly Fast** — Native Rust performance with zero-cost abstractions
- **🛡️ Rock-Solid Security** — Memory safety guaranteed by Rust's ownership model
- **🎯 Zero Dependencies** — Pure standard library, no external crates, no bloat
- **✨ PHP 8.x Compatible** — Run your WordPress, Laravel, Drupal — *unchanged*
- **🔮 Modern Features** — Arrow functions, match expressions, fibers, attributes, pipe operator
- **📈 Battle-Tested** — 200+ comprehensive tests and counting

## ⚡ Get Started in 60 Seconds

```bash
# Clone and build
git clone https://github.com/leocavalcante/vhp.git
cd vhp
cargo build --release

# Your first VHP program
./target/release/vhp -r 'echo "Hello from the future!";'

# Run any PHP file
./target/release/vhp script.php
```

**That's it.** You're now running PHP with Rust-level performance.

## 🎨 The Power of Modern PHP + Rust Performance

VHP brings the **cutting-edge features** of PHP 8.x with the **raw speed** of Rust. Here's what you get:

### Functional Programming That Actually Feels Good

```php
<?php
// Arrow functions with automatic capture (PHP 7.4)
$numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
$doubled = array_map(fn($x) => $x * 2, $numbers);

// First-class callables (PHP 8.1) - elegant function references
$formatter = strtoupper(...);
echo $formatter("hello"); // HELLO

// Pipe operator (PHP 8.5) - chain operations beautifully
$result = "hello world"
    |> strtoupper(...)
    |> str_replace("WORLD", "VHP", ...)
    |> strlen(...);
```

### Modern Language Features

```php
<?php
// Match expressions (PHP 8.0) - pattern matching done right
$status = match($code) {
    200 => "Success",
    404 => "Not Found",
    500, 503 => "Server Error",
    default => "Unknown"
};

// Enums (PHP 8.1) - type-safe choices
enum Status: string {
    case Active = "active";
    case Pending = "pending";
    case Closed = "closed";
}

// Named arguments (PHP 8.0) - crystal clear function calls
createUser(
    name: "Alice",
    email: "alice@example.com",
    verified: true
);
```

### Enterprise-Ready Concurrency

```php
<?php
// Fibers (PHP 8.1) - lightweight cooperative multitasking
$fiber = new Fiber(function(): void {
    echo "Fiber started\n";
    Fiber::suspend();
    echo "Fiber resumed\n";
});

$fiber->start();
$fiber->resume(); // Non-blocking concurrent execution
```

### Full OOP Suite

- ✨ **Anonymous Classes** — Create objects on-the-fly without declaring classes
- 🏗️ **Constructor Property Promotion** — Less boilerplate, more productivity (PHP 8.0)
- 🔒 **Readonly Properties & Classes** — Immutability for safer code (PHP 8.1/8.2)
- 🎭 **Interfaces & Traits** — Flexible, composable design patterns
- 🛡️ **Attributes** — Metadata that doesn't suck (PHP 8.0)
- 🚫 **Exception Handling** — try/catch/finally with throw expressions
- 📝 **Type Declarations** — Full parsing support for parameter and return types (PHP 7.0+)

## 🔥 What Makes VHP Special

### 73+ Built-in Functions and Growing

From string manipulation to array operations, math to type checking — we've got the essentials:

- **String Functions:** strlen, substr, trim, explode, implode, str_replace, strtoupper, strtolower
- **Array Functions:** count, array_push, array_pop, array_shift, array_keys, array_values, in_array, array_merge
- **Math Functions:** abs, ceil, floor, round, max, min, sqrt, pow
- **Type Functions:** intval, floatval, strval, is_string, is_int, is_array, gettype
- **Output Functions:** echo, print, var_dump
- **Reflection API:** Get attributes, analyze classes, introspect your code

### Run Real Codebases, Today

This isn't a toy. VHP targets **PHP 8.x compatibility**, which means:

- 🔷 Run **WordPress** plugins and themes
- 🔷 Execute **Laravel** applications  
- 🔷 Deploy **Drupal** sites
- 🔷 Port **existing PHP codebases** with zero changes

All with the speed and safety of Rust.

## 🤖 The "Vibe Coding" Revolution

Here's where it gets wild: **VHP is proof that AI can build production-grade systems.**

Every function, every test, every feature — built through **natural language conversations** with AI agents. No manual code writing. Just prompts, iteration, and AI doing the heavy lifting.

**This is the experiment:** Can you "vibe code" an entire programming language runtime into existence?

**The answer:** You're looking at it.

### Why Not Just Vibe Code Your Own Rust App?

Fair question. Here's the thing: **existing codebases**.

There are **millions** of PHP applications in production right now. WordPress powers 43% of the web. Laravel runs countless startups. Drupal backs major enterprises. Custom PHP systems everywhere.

**VHP gets you a new runtime for *all* of them** — without rewriting a single line of their code.

Vibe coding Rust gets you *one* new app. VHP gets you a platform for *all* PHP apps.

That's the difference between a tool and an ecosystem.

## 📊 Full Feature Checklist

**Core Language:**
- ✅ PHP tags (`<?php`, `?>`, `<?=`) with mixed HTML/PHP
- ✅ Variables, operators, and expressions
- ✅ Control flow (if/else, while, for, foreach, switch)
- ✅ Arrays (indexed, associative, nested, with trailing commas)
- ✅ User-defined and recursive functions
- ✅ Variadic functions and argument unpacking

**Modern PHP Features:**
- ✅ Arrow functions with automatic capture (PHP 7.4)
- ✅ First-class callables (PHP 8.1)
- ✅ Match expressions (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Named arguments (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Attributes with reflection (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Enums - pure and backed (PHP 8.1)
- ✅ Pipe operator (PHP 8.5)
- ✅ Fibers for concurrency (PHP 8.1)

**Object-Oriented Programming:**
- ✅ Classes & Objects (properties, methods, constructors, $this)
- ✅ Static properties and methods
- ✅ Inheritance
- ✅ Anonymous classes (PHP 7.0)
- ✅ Interfaces and Traits
- ✅ Abstract classes and methods
- ✅ Final classes and methods
- ✅ Constructor Property Promotion (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Readonly properties (PHP 8.1)
- ✅ Readonly classes (PHP 8.2)
- ✅ Object cloning with `clone` and `clone with`

**Error Handling:**
- ✅ Exception handling (try/catch/finally)
- ✅ Throw expressions (PHP 8.0)
- ✅ Multi-catch blocks

**Built-in Functions (73+):**
- ✅ String functions
- ✅ Math functions
- ✅ Array functions
- ✅ Type functions
- ✅ Output functions
- ✅ Reflection API

**[→ See complete feature documentation](https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/features)**

## 🎯 What's Next

We're just getting started. Check out the [roadmap](https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/roadmap) to see what's coming:

- More built-in functions (file I/O, JSON, date/time)
- Advanced OOP features (magic methods, late static binding)
- Namespace support
- Composer compatibility
- Performance optimizations
- And much more...

## 🤝 Join the Revolution

**Want to be part of this experiment?**

- 🐛 **Found a bug?** Open an issue
- 💡 **Have an idea?** Submit a feature request
- 📝 **Improve docs?** PRs welcome
- ✅ **Add tests?** We love comprehensive coverage
- ⭐ **Show support?** Star the repo

Every contribution helps prove that AI-assisted development can build real, production-grade software.

**[→ Contributing Guidelines](https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/contributing)**

## 📜 License

BSD 3-Clause License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

<p align="center">
  <strong>Built with Rust 🦀 and AI 🤖</strong>
  <br><br>
  <em>An experiment in what's possible when humans and AI collaborate</em>
  <br><br>
  <strong>Don't just read about it. <a href="https://leocavalcante.github.io/vhp/installation">Try it now</a>.</strong>
</p>
