docs/roadmap.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Roadmap
nav_order: 6
---

# Roadmap

VHP is being developed incrementally, with each phase adding new capabilities while maintaining backwards compatibility.

## Development Phases

| Phase | Status | Features |
|-------|--------|----------|
| **1. Variables & Operators** | ✅ Complete | Variables, assignment, arithmetic, comparison, logical, ternary, null coalescing |
| **2. Control Flow** | ✅ Complete | `if`/`else`, `while`, `for`, `do-while`, `switch`, `break`/`continue` |
| **3. Functions** | ✅ Complete | Declarations, calls, returns, parameters, 50+ built-ins |
| **4. Arrays** | ✅ Complete | Literals, access, modification, `foreach`, 13 array functions |
| **5. Classes & Objects** | 🚧 Next | Classes, properties, methods, inheritance, interfaces |
| **6. VHP Extensions** | 📋 Planned | Type inference, pattern matching, async/await |

## Phase Details

### Phase 1: Variables & Operators ✅

- Variables (`$name`)
- Assignment (`=`) and compound assignment (`+=`, `-=`, etc.)
- Arithmetic operators (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `**`)
- String concatenation (`.`)
- Comparison operators (`==`, `===`, `!=`, `!==`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`, `<=>`)
- Logical operators (`&&`, `||`, `!`, `and`, `or`, `xor`)
- Null coalescing (`??`)
- Ternary operator (`? :`)
- Increment/decrement (`++`, `--`)

### Phase 2: Control Flow ✅

- `if`/`elseif`/`else` statements
- `while` loops
- `do`...`while` loops
- `for` loops
- `foreach` loops (syntax parsing - requires arrays for full support)
- `switch`/`case`/`default`
- `break`/`continue`

### Phase 3: Functions ✅

- Function declarations
- Function calls
- Return statements
- Parameters (by value, by reference)
- Default parameter values
- 50+ built-in functions

### Phase 4: Arrays ✅

- Array literals (`[1, 2, 3]`)
- Associative arrays (`["key" => "value"]`)
- Array access (`$arr[0]`, `$arr['key']`)
- Array modification and append (`$arr[] = value`)
- `foreach` with arrays (value only and key-value)
- 13 array functions (`count`, `array_push`, `array_pop`, `in_array`, `array_keys`, `array_values`, `array_merge`, `array_reverse`, `array_search`, `array_key_exists`, `range`, etc.)

### Phase 5: Classes & Objects 🚧

- Class declarations
- Properties and methods
- Constructors
- Visibility (public, private, protected)
- Inheritance
- Interfaces and traits
- Static members

### Phase 6: VHP Extensions 💡

Beyond PHP compatibility, VHP aims to introduce modern language features:

- **Type inference** - Automatic type detection
- **Pattern matching** - More powerful switch alternatives
- **Null coalescing improvements** - Enhanced null safety
- **Async/await** - Native asynchronous programming
- **Better error messages** - Developer-friendly diagnostics

## Contributing to the Roadmap

Have ideas for VHP? Feel free to:
- Open an issue to discuss new features
- Submit a pull request with an implementation
- Join the discussion on existing roadmap items

Commit message:

docs: update documentation for class support (Phase 5)
- Mark Phase 5 as complete in roadmap
- Add Classes & Objects section to features docs
- Update test count (178 tests)
- Add classes/ test directory to architecture
- Document class syntax, constructors, properties, methods
- Note remaining Phase 5 features: inheritance, interfaces, traits

Signed-off-by: leocavalcante <leonardo.cavalcante@picpay.com>

docs/roadmap.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Roadmap
nav_order: 6
---

# Roadmap

VHP is being developed incrementally, with each phase adding new capabilities while maintaining backwards compatibility.

## Development Phases

| Phase | Status | Features |
|-------|--------|----------|
| **1. Variables & Operators** | ✅ Complete | Variables, assignment, arithmetic, comparison, logical, ternary, null coalescing |
| **2. Control Flow** | ✅ Complete | `if`/`else`, `while`, `for`, `do-while`, `switch`, `break`/`continue` |
| **3. Functions** | ✅ Complete | Declarations, calls, returns, parameters, 50+ built-ins |
| **4. Arrays** | ✅ Complete | Literals, access, modification, `foreach`, 13 array functions |
| **5. Classes & Objects** | ✅ Complete | Classes, properties, methods, constructors, `$this`, static calls |
| **6. Modern PHP 8.x Features** | 📋 Planned | Match Expressions, Named Arguments, Enums, Fibers, Pipe Operator |

## Phase Details

### Phase 1: Variables & Operators ✅

- Variables (`$name`)
- Assignment (`=`) and compound assignment (`+=`, `-=`, etc.)
- Arithmetic operators (`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `**`)
- String concatenation (`.`)
- Comparison operators (`==`, `===`, `!=`, `!==`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`, `<=>`)
- Logical operators (`&&`, `||`, `!`, `and`, `or`, `xor`)
- Null coalescing (`??`)
- Ternary operator (`? :`)
- Increment/decrement (`++`, `--`)

### Phase 2: Control Flow ✅

- `if`/`elseif`/`else` statements
- `while` loops
- `do`...`while` loops
- `for` loops
- `foreach` loops (syntax parsing - requires arrays for full support)
- `switch`/`case`/`default`
- `break`/`continue`

### Phase 3: Functions ✅

- Function declarations
- Function calls
- Return statements
- Parameters (by value, by reference)
- Default parameter values
- 50+ built-in functions

### Phase 4: Arrays ✅

- Array literals (`[1, 2, 3]`)
- Associative arrays (`["key" => "value"]`)
- Array access (`$arr[0]`, `$arr['key']`)
- Array modification and append (`$arr[] = value`)
- `foreach` with arrays (value only and key-value)
- 13 array functions (`count`, `array_push`, `array_pop`, `in_array`, `array_keys`, `array_values`, `array_merge`, `array_reverse`, `array_search`, `array_key_exists`, `range`, etc.)

### Phase 5: Classes & Objects ✅

- Class declarations with `class` keyword
- Properties with visibility modifiers (`public`, `private`, `protected`)
- Methods with `$this` reference
- Constructors (`__construct`)
- Object instantiation with `new`
- Property access (`$obj->property`)
- Method calls (`$obj->method()`)
- Static method calls (`ClassName::method()`)
- Default property values
- Multiple objects from same class

**Remaining for Phase 5:**
- Inheritance (`extends`)
- Interfaces and traits
- Constructor Property Promotion (PHP 8.0)
- Readonly Properties (PHP 8.1) & Classes (PHP 8.2)
- "Clone with" functionality (PHP 8.5)

### Phase 6: Modern PHP 8.x Features 📋

This phase focuses on catching up with major features introduced in PHP 8.0 and beyond.

- **Match Expressions** (PHP 8.0) - A more powerful and safer alternative to `switch`.
- **Named Arguments** (PHP 8.0) - Pass arguments to functions based on parameter names.
- **Attributes** (PHP 8.0) - Structured metadata for classes, methods, and functions.
- **Enums** (PHP 8.1) - Support for strongly-typed enumerations.
- **Fibers** (PHP 8.1) - The foundation for lightweight, cooperative concurrency (async/await).
- **Pipe Operator** (PHP 8.5) - A functional-style operator for chaining method calls.

## Contributing to the Roadmap

Have ideas for VHP? Feel free to:
- Open an issue to discuss new features
- Submit a pull request with an implementation
- Join the discussion on existing roadmap items
